.TH "dnsi-query" "1" "NLnet Labs"

.SH NAME
dnsi-query - Send a query to a name server

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsi query
[\fIoptions\fR]
.I query_name
[\fIquery_type\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B dnsi query
command sends a DNS query to a name server and prints out the response. The
server can either be selected or the resolver configured in the system will
be used.

The query will be for the domain name given by
.IR query_name .
If
.I query_type
is given, it provides the record type to be queried for. If it is missing,
the record type
.B AAAA
is used.

A specific name server and port can be selected through the
.B --server
and
.B --port
options. If the latter is missing, the default port is used. If no server
is given, the system’s default servers configured in
.I /etc/resolv.conf
are tried in order and the first received response is printed.

If neither the
.B --tcp
or
.B --udp
options are given, the query is first sent over UDP. If a response is
received but it indicates that it had to be truncated to fit, it is repeated
over TCP. If one of the options is given, then only this transport
protocol is used. In particular, if
.B --udp
is given, a truncated answer is accepted and printed.

The output format can be selected through the
.B --format
option. If it is missing, output similar to that of
.BR dig (1)
is used.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -s\fR \fIaddr_or_host\fR, \fB--server\fR \fIaddr_or_host
Specifies the name server to send the query to. If present, the query will be
sent to the server given. If a host name is used, the name is resolved using
the system resolver and the query is sent to the resulting addresses and the
first received response is printed.

If this option is missing,
is given, the system’s default servers configured in
.I /etc/resolv.conf
are tried in order and the first received response is printed.

.TP
.B --p\fR \fIport\fR, \fB--port\fR \fIport
Specifies the port to use when connecting to the name server. If missing, the
default port will be used. This is 53 for UDP and TCP.

.TP
.BR -4 ,\  --ipv4
Indicates that only IPv4 should be used.

.TP
.BR -6 ,\  --ipv6
Indicates that only IPv4 should be used.

.TP
.BR -t ,\  --tcp
Specifies that only TCP should be used. 

.TP
.BR -u ,\  --udp
Specifies that only UDP should be used and the resulting answer be printed
even if it had to be truncated.

.TP
.B --tls
Specifies that TLS should be used. In this case a server name or address
must be explicitly given via the
.B --server
option.

.TP
.B --tls-hostname
Specifies the hostname to be used for server certificate validation when
.B --tls
is used. By default the name given to the
.B --server
option is used. The option is mandatory, however, if an address is used as
for the server.

.TP
.BI --timeout \ seconds
Sets the time after sending a query before a server is considered
non-responsive if an answer is not received.

The
.I
seconds
value can be given with decimal fractions, e.g., 0.2.

.TP
.BI --retries \ number
The number of times a query is retried over UDP after timing out before a
server is considered non-responsive. This value is ignored for transport
protocols other than UDP.

.TP
.BI --udp-payload-size \ bytes
Sets the accepted UDP payload size announced in the query to server. If this
option is missing, the default size of 1232 bytes is used. The value is
ignored for transport protocols other than UDP.

.TP
.BR --ad ,\  --no-ad
Specifies that the "authentic data" flag, or AD flag for short, should be
set or not set in the query. If neither option is given, the flag will not
be set.

The flag indicates to a resolver that it should set the AD flag in its
reply if it is found to be DNSSEC secure.

.TP
.BR --cd ,\  --no-cd
Specifies that the "checking disabled" flag, or CD flag for short, should be
set or not set in the query. If neither option is given, the flag will not
be set.

The flag indicates that the server should not do any DNSSEC validation.

.TP
.BR --do ,\  --no-do
Specifies that the "DNSSEC OK" flag, or DO flag for short, should be
set or not set in the query. If neither option is given, the flag will not
be set.

The flag indicates that the server should include all DNSSEC-related records
with the answer.

.TP
.BR --rd ,\  --no-rd
Specifies that the "recursion desired" flag, or RD flag for short, should be
set or not set in the query. If neither option is given, the flag will be set.

The flag indicates to a resolver that it should try and gather all necessary
information from their authoritative name servers to create a complete answer
to the query. This process is called "recursion."

.TP
.BR -f ,\  --force
Requests that no sanity checks are done and the query is to be sent as
specified.

Normally,
.B dnsi query
will refuse to do zone transfer queries with query type AXFR or IXFR
because they require special processing. With this option, you can force
it to send these queries, anyway.

.TP
.B --verify
Requests to compare the received response to the response provided
by one of the authoritative name servers.

If the resource records in the
answer section differ, a diff between them is provided. Records that appear
in the answer section of the received response only are prefixed with a plus,
records that appard in the answer section of the authoritative response are
prefixed with a minus.

The records in the authority and additional sections are not compared.

This option is intended for zones that provide the same answer on all servers
and only one authoritative response is acquired and considered. If the zone's
name servers provided differing answers, re-running the command thus may
result in different output.

.TP
.BI --format \ format
Selects the data format in which the response should be printed. The
following formats are currently supported:
.RS
.TP
.B dig
The response and some additional information are printed in a format
similar to what
.BR dig (1)
produces.

This is currently the default format if the option is missing.
.RE

.TP
.BR -h ,\  --help
Prints some help information.

